COINTELPRO the FBI's covert action
programs against American citizens one
introduction and summary COINTELPRO is
the FBI acronym for a series of covert
action programs directed against
domestic groups in these programs the
bureau went beyond the collection of
intelligence to secret action designed
to disrupt and neutralize target groups
and individuals the techniques were
adopted wholesale from wartime
counterintelligence and ranged from the
trivial mailing reprints of Reader's
Digest articles to college
administrators to the degrading sending
anonymous poison-pen letters intended to
break up marriages and the dangerous
encouraging gang warfare and falsely
labeling members of a violent group as
police informers this report is based on
a staff study of more than 20,000 pages
of bureau documents depositions of many
of the bureau agents involved in the
programs and interviews of several
COINTELPRO targets the examples selected
for discussion necessarily represent a
small percentage of the more than 2,000
approved COINTELPRO actions nevertheless
the cases demonstrate the consequences
of a government agency's decision to
take the law into its own hands for the
greater good of the country
COINTELPRO began in 1956 in part because
of frustration with Supreme Court
rulings limiting the government's power
to proceed overtly against dissident
groups
it ended in 1971 with the threat of
public exposure in the intervening 15
years the bureau conducted a
sophisticated vigilante operation aimed
squarely at preventing the exercise of
First Amendment rights of speech and
Association on the theory that
preventing the growth of dangerous
groups and the propagation of dangerous
ideas would protect the national
security and the
violence many of the techniques used
would be intolerable in a Democratic
Society even if all of the targets had
been involved in violent activity but
COINTELPRO went far beyond that the
unexpressed major premise of the
programs was that a law-enforcement
agency has the duty to do whatever is
necessary to combat perceived threats to
the existing social and political order
a counterintelligence program a misnomer
for domestic covert action COINTELPRO is
an acronym for counterintelligence
program counterintelligence is defined
as those actions by an intelligence
agency intended to protect its own
security and to undermine hostile
intelligence operations under COINTELPRO
certain techniques the bureau had used
against hostile foreign agents were
adopted for use against perceived
domestic threats to the established
political and social order the formal
programs which incorporated these
techniques were therefore also called
counterintelligence covert action is
however a more accurate term for the
bureau's programs directed against
American citizens covert action is the
label applied to clandestine activities
intended to influence political choices
and social values bee who were the
targets one the five targeted groups the
bureau's covert action programs were
aimed at five perceived threats to
domestic tranquility the Communist Party
USA program 1956 to 1971 the Socialist
Workers Party program 1961 to 1969 the
white hate group program 1964 to 1971
the black nationalist hate group program
1967 to 1971 and the New Left program
1968 to 1971 to
labels without meaning the bureau's
titles for its programs should not be
accepted uncritically they imply a
precision of definition and of targeting
which did not exist even the names of
the later programs had no clear
definition the black nationalist program
according to its supervisor included a
great number of organizations that you
might not today characterized as black
nationalists but which were in fact
primarily black indeed the nonviolent
Southern Christian Leadership Conference
was labeled as a black nationalist hate
group nor could anyone at the bureau
even define knew left except as more or
less an attitude furthermore the actual
targets were chosen from a far broader
group than the names of the programs
would imply the CPUSA program targeted
not only party members but also sponsors
of the National Committee to abolish the
house on American Activities Committee
and civil rights leaders allegedly under
communist influence or simply not
anti-communist the Socialist Workers
Party program included non swp sponsors
of anti-war demonstrations which were
co-sponsored by the swp or the young
socialist alliance its youth group the
black nationalist program targeted a
range of organizations from the Panthers
to snick to the peaceful Southern
Christian Leadership Conference and
included most black student groups new
left targets ranged from the SDS to the
Interuniversity Committee for debate on
foreign policy from all of Antioch
College vanguard of the new left to the
New Mexico Free University and other
alternate schools and from underground
newspapers to students protesting
university censorship of a student
publication by carrying signs with
four-letter words on them see what were
the purposes of COINTELPRO the breadth
of targeting and lack of substantive
content and the descriptive titles of
the program
reflect the range of motivations for
COINTELPRO activity protecting national
security preventing violence and
maintaining the existing social and
political order by disrupting and
neutralizing groups and individuals
perceived as threats one protecting
national security
the first COINTELPRO against the CPUSA
was instituted to counter what the
bureau believed to be a threat to the
national security as the chief of the
COINTELPRO unit explained it we were
trying first to develop intelligence so
we would know what they were doing and
second to contain the threat to stop the
spread of communism to stop the
effectiveness of the Communist Party as
a vehicle of Soviet intelligence
propaganda and agitation had the bureau
stopped there perhaps the term
counterintelligence
would have been an accurate label for
the program the expansion of the CPUSA
program to non-communists however and
the addition of subsequent programs make
it clear that other purposes were also
at work to preventing violence one of
these purposes was the prevention of
violence every bureau witness deposed
stated that the purpose of the
particular program or programs with
which he was associated was to deter
violent acts by the target groups
although the witnesses differed in their
assessment of how successful the
programs were in achieving that goal the
preventive function was not however
intended to be a product of specific
proposals directed at specific criminal
acts rather the programs were aimed at
groups which the bureau believed to be
violent or to have the potential for
violence the programs were to prevent
violence by deterring membership in the
target groups even if neither the
particular member nor the group was
violent at the time as the supervisor of
the black nationalist COINTELPRO put it
obviously you are going to prevent
violence or a greater amount of violence
if you have
groups black nationalist supervisor
deposition 10 1775 page 24
the COINTELPRO unit chief agreed we also
made an effort to deter or counteract
the propaganda and to deter recruitment
where we could this was done with the
view that if we could curb the
organization we could curb the action or
the violence within the organization in
short the programs were to prevent
violence indirectly rather than directly
by preventing possibly violent citizens
from joining or continuing to associate
with possibly violent groups the
prevention of violence is clearly not in
itself an improper purpose preventing
violence is the ultimate goal of most
law enforcement prosecution and
sentencing are intended to deter future
criminal behavior not only of the
subject but also of others who might
break the law in that sense law
enforcement legitimately attempts the
indirect prevention of possible violence
and if the methods used are proper
raises no constitutional issues when the
government goes beyond traditional law
enforcement methods however and attacks
group membership and advocacy it treads
on ground forbidden to it by the
Constitution in Brandenburg V Ohio 395
us 444 1969 the Supreme Court held that
the government is not permitted to
forbid or prescribed advocacy of the use
of force or law violation except where
such advocacy is directed toward
inciting or producing imminent lawless
action and is likely to incite or
produce such action in the absence of
such clear and present danger the
government cannot act against speech nor
presumably against Association 3
maintaining the existing social and
political order protecting national
security and preventing violence are the
purposes advanced by the bureau for
COINTELPRO
there is another purpose for COINTELPRO
which is not explicit but which offers
the only explanation for those actions
which had no conceivable rational
relationship to either national security
or violent activity the unexpressed
major premise of much of COINTELPRO is
that the Bureau has a role in
maintaining the existing social order
and that its efforts should be aimed
toward combating those who threaten that
order the new Left COINTELPRO presents
the most striking example of this
attitude as discussed earlier the Bureau
did not define the term new left and the
range of targets went far beyond alleged
subversives or extremists thus for
example two student participants in a
free speech demonstration were targeted
because they defended the use of the
classic four-letter word significantly
they were made COINTELPRO subjects even
though the demonstration does not appear
to be inspired by the new left because
it shows obvious disregard for decency
and established morality in another case
reprints of a newspaper article entitled
rabbi and Vietnam says withdrawal not
the answer were mailed to members of the
Vietnam Day Committee to convince them
of the correctness of the u.s. foreign
policy in Vietnam still another document
in Vaes against the liberal press and
the bleeding hearts and the forces on
the Left which were taking advantage of
the situation in Chicago surrounding the
Democratic National Convention to attack
the police and organized law-enforcement
agencies upholding decency and
established morality defending the
correctness of u.s. foreign policy and
attacking those who thought the Chicago
Police used undue force have no apparent
connection with the expressed goals of
protecting national security and
preventing violence these documents
among others examined compel the
conclusion that federal law enforcement
officers looked upon themselves as guard
of the status quo the attitude should
not be a surprise the difficulty lies in
the choice of weapons D what techniques
were used one the techniques of wartime
under the COINTELPRO programs the
arsenal of techniques used against
foreign espionage agents was transferred
to domestic enemies as William C
Sullivan former assistant to the
director put it this is a rough tough
dirty business and dangerous it was
dangerous at times
no holds were barred we have used these
techniques against Soviet agents they
have used them against us the same
methods were brought home against any
organization against which we were
targeted we did not differentiate this
is a rough tough business mr. Sullivan's
description rough tough and dirty is
accurate and the course of co intel pros
15-year history a number of individual
actions may have violated specific
criminal statutes a number of individual
actions involved risk of serious bodily
injury or death to the targets at least
four assaults were reported as results
and a number of actions while not
illegal or dangerous can only be
described as abhorrent
in a free society on the other hand many
of the actions were more silly than
repellent the bureau approved 2,370
separate counterintelligence actions
their techniques ranged from anonymously
mailing reprints of newspaper and
magazine articles sometimes bureau
authored or planted to group members or
supporters to convince them of the error
of their ways to mailing anonymous
letters to a members spouse accusing the
target of infidelity from using
informants to raise controversial issues
at meetings in order to cause descent to
the snitch jacket falsely labeling a
group member as an informant and
encouraging street warfare between
violent groups from contacting members
of a legitimate group to expose the
alleged subversive background of a
fellow member to contacting an employer
to get a target fired from attempting to
arrange for reporters to interview
targets with planted questions to trying
to stop targets from speaking at all
from notifying state and local
authorities of a targets criminal law
violations to using the IRS to audit a
professor not just to collect any taxes
owing but to distract him from his
political activities to techniques
carrying a serious risk of physical
emotional or economic damage the Bureau
recognized that some techniques were
more likely than others to cause serious
physical emotional or economic damage to
the targets any proposed use of those
techniques was scrutinized carefully by
headquarters supervisory personnel in an
attempt to balance the greater good to
be achieved by the proposal against the
known or risked harm to the target if
the good was sufficient the proposal was
approved for instance in discussing
anonymous letters to spouses the agent
who supervised the new left COINTELPRO
stated before recommending approval I
would want to know what you want to get
out of this who are these people if it's
somebody and say they did split up what
would accrue from it as far as
disrupting the new left is concerned say
they broke up what then the question
would be is it worth it
similarly with regard to the snitch
jacket technique falsely labeling a
group member as a police informant the
chief of the racial intelligence section
stated you have to be able to make
decisions and I am sure that labeling
somebody as an informant that you'd want
to make certain that it served a good
purpose before you did it and not do it
haphazardly it is a serious thing as far
as I am aware in the black extremists
area by using that technique no one was
killed I am sure of that more was
asked whether the fact that no one was
killed was the result of luck or
planning he answered oh it just happened
that way I'm sure it is thus clear that
as Sullivan said no holds were barred
although some holds were weighed more
carefully than others when the
willingness to use techniques which were
concededly dangerous or harmful to the
targets is combined with the range of
purposes and criteria by which these
targets were chosen the result is
neither within bounds nor justified in a
free society II legal restrictions were
ignored what happened to turn a law
enforcement agency into a law violator
why do those involved still believe
their actions were not only defensible
but right the answers to these questions
are found in a combination of factors
the availability of information showing
the targets vulnerability gathered
through the unrestrained collection of
domestic intelligence the belief both
within and without the Bureau that it
could handle any problem and frustration
with the apparent inability of
traditional law enforcement methods to
solve the problems presented there is no
doubt like Congress and the public
looked to the bureau for protection
against domestic and foreign threats as
the COINTELPRO unit chief stated at this
time the mid-1950s there was a general
philosophy to the general attitude of
the public at this time was you did not
have to worry about communism because
the FBI would take care of it leave it
to the FBI I hardly know an agent who
would ever go to a social affair or
something if he were introduced as FBI
the comment would be we feel very good
because we know you are handling the
threat we were handling the threat with
what directives and statutes were
available there did not seem to be any
strong interest of anybody to give us
stronger or better defined statutes not
only was no one interested in giving the
bureau better statutes
nor for that matter did the bureau
request them but the Supreme Court
drastically narrowed the scope of the
statutes available the bureau personnel
involved traced the institution of the
first formal counterintelligence program
to the Supreme Court reversal of the
Smith act convictions the unit chief
testified the Supreme Court rulings had
rendered the Smith act technically
unenforceable it made it ineffective to
prosecute Communist Party members made
it impossible to prosecute Communist
Party members at the time this belief in
the failure of law enforcement produced
the subsequent Co Intel prose as well
the unit chief continued the other Co
Intel programs were opened as the threat
arose in areas of extremism and
subversion and there were not adequate
statutes to proceed against the
organization or to prevent their
activities every Bureau witness deposed
agreed that his particular COINTELPRO
was the result of tremendous pressure on
the bureau to do something about a
perceived threat coupled with the
inability of law enforcement techniques
to cope with the situation either
because there were no pertinent federal
statutes or because local law
enforcement efforts were stymied by
indifference or the refusal of those in
charge to call the police outside
pressure and law enforcement frustration
do not of course fully explain
COINTELPRO perhaps after all the best
explanation was proffered by george
seymour the racial intelligence section
chief the FBI's counterintelligence
program came up because there was a
point if you have anything in the FBI
you have an action-oriented group of
people who see something happening and
want to do something to take its place
F command and control 1 1956 to 1971
while that action-oriented group of
people was proceeding with 15 years of
COINTELPRO activities
where were those responsible for the
supervision and control of the bureau
part of the answer lies in the
definition of covert action clandestine
activities no one outside the bureau was
supposed to know that COINTELPRO existed
even within the bureau the programs were
handled on a need-to-know basis
nevertheless the bureau has supplied the
committee with documents which support
its contention that various attorneys
general advisors to presidents members
of the House Appropriations Subcommittee
and in 1958 the cabinet were at least
put on notice of the existence of the
CPUSA
and white hate Co Intel pros the bureau
cannot support its claim that anyone
outside the FBI was informed of the
existence of the Socialist Workers Party
black nationalist or New Left
Co Intel pros and even those letters or
briefings which referred usually
indirectly to the CP USA and white hate
Co Intel pros failed to mention the use
of techniques which risked physical
emotional or economic damage to their
targets in any event there is no record
that any of these officials asked to
know more and none of them appears to
have expressed disapproval based on the
information they were given as the
history of the domestic intelligence
division shows the absence of
disapproval has been interpreted by the
bureau as sufficient authorisation to
continue an activity and occasionally
even express disapproval has not suffice
to stop a practice perhaps however the
crux of the command-and-control problem
lies in the testimony by one former
attorney general that he was too busy to
know what the bureau was doing and by
another that as a matter of political
reality he could not have stopped it
anyway to host 1971 whether the Attorney
General can control the bureau is still
an open question the Petersons Committee
which was formed within the Justice
Department to investigate COINTELPRO
at Attorney General Saxbys request
worked only with Bureau prepared
summaries of the COINTELPRO files
further the fact that the Department of
Justice must work with the bureau on a
day to day basis may influence the
department's judgment on Bureau
activities G termination if COINTELPRO
had been a short-lived aberration the
thorny problems of motivation techniques
and control presented might be safely
relegated to history
however COINTELPRO existed for years on
an ad hoc basis before the formal
programs were instituted and more
significantly COINTELPRO type activities
may continue today under the rubric of
investigation one the gray area between
counterintelligence and investigation
the word counterintelligence had no
fixed meaning even before the programs
were terminated the bureau witnesses
agreed that there is a large gray area
between counterintelligence and
aggressive investigation and that
headquarters supervisors sometimes had
difficulty in deciding which captions
should go on certain proposals
aggressive investigation continues and
may be even more disruptive than covert
action an anonymous letter COINTELPRO
can be ignored as the work of a crank an
overt approach by the bureau
investigation is not so easily dismissed
the line between information collection
and harassment can be extremely thin to
is COINTELPRO continuing COINTELPRO type
activities which are clearly not within
the gray area between COINTELPRO and
investigation have continued on at least
three occasions although all Co Intel
pros were officially terminated for
security reasons on April 27th 1971 the
documents discontinuing the program
provide
in exceptional circumstances where it is
considered counterintelligence action is
warranted recommendations should be
submitted to the bureau under the
individual case caption to which it
pertains these recommendations will be
considered on an individual basis the
committee requested that the bureau
provided with a list of any COINTELPRO
type actions since April 28 1971 the
bureau first advised the committee that
a review failed to develop any
information indicating post termination
COINTELPRO activity subsequently the
bureau located and furnished to the
committee two instances of COINTELPRO
type operations the committee has
discovered a third instance four months
after COINTELPRO was terminated
information on an attorney's political
background was furnished to friendly
newspaper sources under the so called
mass media program intended to discredit
both the attorney and his client the
committee has not been able to determine
with any greater precision the extent to
which COINTELPRO may be continuing any
proposals to initiate COINTELPRO type
action would be filed under the
individual case caption the bureau has
over 500,000 case files and each one
would have to be searched in this
context it should be noted that a bureau
search of all field office Co Intel
profiles revealed the existence of five
operations in addition to those known to
the Petersons committee a search of all
investigative files might be similarly
productive 3 the future of COINTELPRO
attitudes within and without the bureau
demonstrate a continued belief by some
that covert action against American
citizens is permissible if the need for
it is strong enough when the Petersons
committee report on COINTELPRO was
released director kelly responded for
the FBI to have done less under the
circumstances would have been an
abdication of its responsibilities to
the American
can people he also restated his feeling
that the FBI's counterintelligence
programs had an impact on the crises of
the time and therefore that they helped
to bring about a favorable change in
this country in his testimony before the
Select Committee director Kelly
continued to defend COINTELPRO al Viet
with some reservations what I said then
in 1974 and what I believe today is that
the FBI employees involved in these
programs did what they felt was expected
of them by the president the Attorney
General the Congress and the people of
the United States our concern over
whatever abuses occurred in the
counterintelligence programs and there
were some substantial ones should not
obscure the underlying purpose of those
programs we must recognize that
situations have occurred in the past and
will arise in the future where the
government may well be expected to
depart from its traditional role in the
FBI's case as an investigative and
intelligence gathering agency and take
affirmative steps which are needed to
meet an imminent threat to human life or
property nor is the director alone in
his belief that faced with sufficient
threat covert disruption is justified
the Department of Justice promulgated
tentative guidelines for the Bureau
which would have permitted the Attorney
General to authorize preventive action
where there is a substantial possibility
that violence will occur and prosecution
is impracticable although those
guidelines have now been dropped the
principle has not been rejected